Evaluation documentation (#291)
EducationalTestingService/rsmtool: doc/evaluation.rst

 
The following conventions are used in the formulas in this section:

:math:`N` - total number of responses in the :ref:`evaluation set<test_file>` with numeric human score and numeric system score. Zero human scores are by default also excluded from the evaluation unless :ref:`exclude_zero_scores<exclude_zero_scores_rsmtool>` was set to ``false``.

:math:`M` - system score. The primary evaluation analyses in the RSMTool report are conducted for *all* six types of :ref:`scores <score_postprocessing>`. For some additional evaluations, the user can pick between raw and scaled scores using the :ref:`use_scaled_predictions<use_scaled_predictions_rsmtool>` configuration field in RSMTool or :ref:`scale_with<scale_with_eval>` in RSMEval.

:math:`H` - human score. The score values in :ref:`test_label_column<test_label_column_rsmtool>` for RSMTool or :ref:`human_score_column<human_score_column_eval>` for RSMEval.

.. _h2:

:math:`H2` - second human score (if available). The score values in :ref:`second_human_score_column<second_human_score_column_rsmtool>`.

> :math:`N_2` - total number of responses in the evaluation set where both :math:`H` and :math:`H2` are available and are numeric and non-zero (unless :ref:`exclude_zero_scores<exclude_zero_scores_rsmtool>` was set to ``false``).

Author: Two primary reasons, both related to readability: 
(1) We use `H_i` notation later to refer to `H` scores for `i` response and `H_2` would become ambiguous in this context.
(2) The formula for PRMSE is easier to read with `N_2` notation since it has a lot of `2N_2` that would need to be converted to `2*N2` making that formula very difficult to parse. 

Conceptually, the two variables are not equal, so  it makes sense to use different notation: `H2` refers to second rater, a separate measurement. `N_2` is the total number of double-scored responses, an auxiliary variable.

> :math:`N_2` - total number of responses in the evaluation set where both :math:`H` and :math:`H2` are available and are numeric and non-zero (unless :ref:`exclude_zero_scores<exclude_zero_scores_rsmtool>` was set to ``false``).

Reviewer: Makes sense. Thanks!

.. _exact_agreement:

Percent exact agreement (rounded scores only)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Percentage responses where human and system scores match exactly. 

:math:`A = \sum_{i=1}^{N}\frac{w_i}{N} \times 100`

where :math:`w_i=1` if :math:`M_i = H_i` and :math:`w_i=0` if  :math:`M_i \neq H_i`

The percent exact agreement is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.utils.agreement<agreement_api>` with ``tolerance`` set to ``0``.

.. _adjacent_agreement:

Percent exact + adjacent agreement
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Percentage responses where the absolute difference between human and system scores is ``1`` or less.

:math:`A_{adj} = \sum_{i=1}^{N}\frac{w_i}{N} \times 100`

where :math:`w_i=1` if :math:`|M_i-H_i| \leq 1` and :math:`w_i=0` if  :math:`|M_i-H_i| \gt 1`.

The percent exact + adjacent agreement is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.utils.agreement<agreement_api>` with ``tolerance`` set to ``1``.

.. _kappa: 

Cohen's kappa (rounded scores only)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> 

Author: Do you have any suggestions how to replace them? There is certain elegance in the current formula with `K` and `k` both being variables used for score (score levels vs. individual scores) and `j` and `k` being typical co-occuring indices. I played around with possible substitutions but they all broke the flow of the formula in my opinion

> 

Reviewer: I think `kappa` and (lowercased) `k` can be visually confusing to some people but if you don't think it's an issue, I am fine with it too.

- :math:`\hat{H}` is used instead of :math:`H` to compute :math:`MSE(\hat{H}|M)` and :math:`\sigma_{\hat{H}}^2`. :math:`\hat{H}` is the average of two human scores for each response (:math:`\hat{H_i} = \frac{{H_i}+{H2_i}}{2}`). These evaluations use :math:`\hat{H}` rather than :math:`H` because the measurement errors for each rater are assumed to be random and thus partially cancel out making the average :math:`\hat{H}` closer to true score :math:`T` than :math:`H` or :math:`H2`. 

- To compute estimates for true scores, the values for observed scores are adjusted for **variance of measurement errors** (:math:`\sigma_{e}^2`) in human scores defined as:

:math:`\sigma_{e}^2 = \frac{1}{2 \times N_2}\sum_{i=1}^{N_2}{(H_{i} - H2_{i})^2}`

In a simple case where **all responses are double-scored**, the **mean squared error** when predicting true score with system score :math:`MSE(T|M)` is estimated as:

:math:`MSE(T|M) = MSE(\hat{H}|M)-\frac{1}{2}\sigma_{e}^2`

The **variance of true score** (:math:`\sigma_T^2`) is estimated as: 

:math:`\sigma_T^2 = \sigma_{\hat{H}}^2 - \frac{1}{2}\sigma_{e}^2`

> The PRMSE formula implemented in RSMTool is more general and allows for both all responses to be double-scored and **only subset of responses to be double-scored**. This formula uses the same computation for :math:`\sigma_{e}^2` but more complex formulas for :math:`MSE(T|M)` and :math:`\sigma_T^2`. The formulas were derived to ensure consistent results regardless of what percentage of data was double-scored. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PRMSE formula implemented in RSMTool is more general and can also handle the case where **only a subset** of responses are double-scored. The formula in this case uses the same computation for :math:`\sigma_{e}^2` but more complex formulas for :math:`MSE(T|M)` and :math:`\sigma_T^2`. The formulas are derived to ensure consistent results regardless of what percentage of data was double-scored and are as follows:
```

:math:`MSE(T|M) = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{N}{c_i(\hat{H_i} - M_i)^2} - N\sigma_{e}^2}{N_1+2N_2}`

:math:`\sigma_T^2=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{N}{c_i(\hat{H}_i - \bar{\hat{H}})^2}-(N-1)\sigma_{e}^2}{(N-1) + \frac{N_2(N_1+2N_2-2)}{N_1+2N_2}}`

where 

* :math:`C_i=1` or 2 depending on the number of human scores observed for individual 𝑖.

* :math:`\hat{H}` is the average of two human scores :math:`\hat{H_i} = \frac{{H_i}+{H2_i}}{2}` when two scores available or :math:`\hat{H_i} = H_i` when only one score is available. 

* :math:`N_1` is the number of responses with only one human score available (:math:`N_1+N_2=N`)

> PRMSE is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.prmse_utils.compute_prmse <prmse_api>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PRMSE is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.prmse_utils.compute_prmse <prmse_api>`.
```

.. note::

> 	The formula assigns higher weight to discrepancies between system scores and human score when human score is the average of two human scores than when the human score is based on a single score.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	The PRMSE formula assigns higher weight to discrepancies between system scores and human scores when the latter are averages than when they are individual scores.
```

Author: I think spelling out what the averages and individual scores are makes it clearer. What is it about the original wording that made you want to edit?

Reviewer: Sure, if you prefer that's fine too. I'd just make sure that "human score" was appropriately pluralized to agree with "system scores". Or the other way around.

Author: I pushed a suggested edit.

Fairness
~~~~~~~~

Fairness of automated scores is an important component of RSMTool evaluations (see `Madnani et al, 2017 <https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/papers/W/W17/W17-1605/>`_).

> When defining the experiment, the user has the option of specifying which subgroups should be considered for such evaluations using :ref:`subgroups<subgroups_rsmtool>` field. These subgroups are then used in all fairness evaluations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When defining an experiment, the RSMTool user has the option of specifying which subgroups should be considered for such evaluations using :ref:`subgroups<subgroups_rsmtool>` field. These subgroups are then used in all fairness evaluations. 
```

> All fairness evaluations are conducted on the evaluation set. The metrics is only computed for either `raw_trim` or `scale_trim` score (see :ref:`score postprocessing<score_postprocessing>` for further detail) depending on the value of :ref:`use_scaled_predictions<use_scaled_predictions_rsmtool>` in RSMTool or :ref:`scale_with<scale_with_eval>` in RSMEval. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All fairness evaluations are conducted on the evaluation set. The metrics are only computed for either `raw_trim` or `scale_trim` scores (see :ref:`score postprocessing<score_postprocessing>` for further details) depending on the value of :ref:`use_scaled_predictions<use_scaled_predictions_rsmtool>` in RSMTool or the value of :ref:`scale_with<scale_with_eval>` in RSMEval. 
```

.. _dsm:

> Difference between standardized means for subgroups (DSM)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Differences between standardized means for subgroups (DSM)
```

?

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> This is a standard evaluation used for evaluating subgroup differences. The  metrics are available in :ref:`intermediate files<rsmtool_eval_files>` ``eval_by_<SUBGROUP>``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a standard evaluation used for evaluating subgroup differences. The metrics are available in the :ref:`intermediate files<rsmtool_eval_files>` ``eval_by_<SUBGROUP>``.
```

> DSM is computed in the following way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DSM is computed as follows:
```

> 1. For each group, get the *z*-score for each response, using the :math:`\bar{H}`, :math:`\bar{M}`, :math:`\sigma_H`, and :math:`\sigma_S` for system and human scores for the whole evaluation set:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. For each group, get the *z*-score for each response :math:i, using the :math:`\bar{H}`, :math:`\bar{M}`, :math:`\sigma_H`, and :math:`\sigma_S` for system and human scores for the whole evaluation set:
```

> :math:`z_{H_{i}} = \frac{H_i - \bar{H}}{\sigma_H}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        :math:`z_{H_{i}} = \frac{H_i - \bar{H}}{\sigma_H}`
```

> :math:`z_{M_{i}} = \frac{M_i - \bar{M}}{\sigma_M}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        :math:`z_{M_{i}} = \frac{M_i - \bar{M}}{\sigma_M}`
```

> Where i = response i

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 2. For each response, calculate the difference between machine and human scores: :math:`z_{M_{i}} - z_{H_{i}}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. For each response :math:i, calculate the difference between machine and human scores: :math:`z_{M_{i}} - z_{H_{i}}`
```

3. Calculate the mean of the difference :math:`z_{M_{i}} - z_{H_{i}}` by subgroup of interest. 

DSM is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.utils.difference_of_standardized_means<dsm_api>` with:

 ``population_y_true_observe_mn`` = :math:`\bar{H}` for the whole evaluation set

 ``population_y_pred_mn`` = :math:`\bar{M}` for the whole evaluation set

 ``population_y_true_observed_sd`` = :math:`\sigma_H` for the whole evaluation set

 ``population_y_pred_sd`` = :math:`\sigma_M` for the whole evaluation set

 .. note::

> 	In RSMTool v.6 and earlier subgroup differences were computed using :ref:`standardized mean difference <SMD>` with ``method`` set to ``williamson``. Since this metrics was very sensitive to score distributions, these are no longer computed by RSMTool 7.0. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	In RSMTool v6.x and earlier, subgroup differences were computed using :ref:`standardized mean difference <SMD>` with the ``method`` argument set to ``"williamson"``. Since the differences computed in this manner were very sensitive to score distributions, RSMTool no longer uses this function to compute subgroup differences starting with v7.0.
```

.. _fairness_extra: 

Additional fairness evaluations
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> RSMTool v.7 includes aditional fairness analyses suggested in `Loukina, Madnani, & Zechner, 2019 <https://aclweb.org/anthology/papers/W/W19/W19-4401/>`_. The computed metrics are available in :ref:`intermediate files<rsmtool_fairness_eval>` ``fairness_metrics_by_<SUBGROUP>``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with v7.0, RSMTool includes additional fairness analyses suggested in `Loukina, Madnani, & Zechner, 2019 <https://aclweb.org/anthology/papers/W/W19/W19-4401/>`_. The computed metrics from these analyses are available in :ref:`intermediate files<rsmtool_fairness_eval>` ``fairness_metrics_by_<SUBGROUP>``.
```

These include: 

- Overall score accuracy: percentage of variance in squared error :math:`(M-H)^2` explained by subgroup membership

- Overall score difference: percentage of variance in absolute error :math:`(M-H)` explained by subgroup membership

- Conditional score difference: percentage of variance in absolute error :math:`(M-H)` explained by subgroup membership when controlling for human score

> Please refer to the paper for the full description of this metrics. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please refer to the paper for full descriptions of these metrics. 
```

> The fairness metrics are computed using :ref:`rsmtool.fairness_utils.get_fairness_analyses<fairness_api>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fairness metrics are computed using :ref:`rsmtool.fairness_utils.get_fairness_analyses<fairness_api>`.
```

.. _consistency_metrics:

Human-human agreement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If :ref:`H2<h2>` values are available, RSMTool computes the following metrics of human-human agreement using only the :math:`N_2` responses with numeric values available for both :math:`H` and :math:`H2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If scores from a second human (:ref:`H2<h2>`) are available, RSMTool computes the following additional metrics for human-human agreement using only the :math:`N_2` responses, including only responses that contain numeric values for both the :math:`H` and :math:`H2` columns.
```

The computed metrics are available in the :ref:`intermediate file<rsmtool_consistency_files>` ``consistency``.

Percent exact agreement
+++++++++++++++++++++++

Same as :ref:`percent exact agreement for observed scores<exact_agreement>` but substituting :math:`H2` for :math:`M`.

Percent exact + ajdacent agreement
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Same as :ref:`percent adjacent agreement for observed scores<exact_agreement>` but substituting :math:`H2` for :math:`M` and :math:`N_2` for :math:`N`.

Cohen's kappa
+++++++++++++

Same as :ref:`Cohen's kappa for observed scores<kappa>` but substituting :math:`H2` for :math:`M` and :math:`N_2` for :math:`N`.

Quadratic weighted kappa (QWK)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Same as :ref:`QWK for observed scores<qwk>` but substituting :math:`H2` for :math:`M` and :math:`N_2` for :math:`N`.

Pearson Correlation coefficient (r)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Same as :ref:`r for observed scores<r>` but substituting :math:`H2` for :math:`M` and :math:`N_2` for :math:`N`.

Standardized mean difference (SMD)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

:math:`SMD = \frac{\bar{H2}-\bar{H1}}{ \sqrt{\frac{\sigma_{H}^2 + \sigma_{H2}^2}{2}}}`

> Unlike :ref:`SMD for human-system scores<smd>`, the denominator in this case is pooled standard deviation of :math:`H1` and :math:`H2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike :ref:`SMD for human-system scores<smd>`, the denominator in this case is the "pooled" standard deviation of :math:`H1` and :math:`H2`.
```

> SMD between two human scores is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.utils.standardized_mean_difference<smd_api>` with ``method`` set to ``pooled``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, SMD between two human scores is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.utils.standardized_mean_difference<smd_api>` with the ``method`` argument set to ``"pooled"``.
```

.. note::

> 	In RSMTool v.6 and earlier SMD was computed with ``method`` set to ``williamson`` as described in `Williamson et al. (2012) <https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1745-3992.2011.00223.x>`_.  The values computed by RSMTool 7.0 are *different* from those computed by earlier versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	In RSMTool v6.x and earlier, SMD was computed with the ``method`` argument set to ``"williamson"`` as described in `Williamson et al. (2012) <https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1745-3992.2011.00223.x>`_.  Starting with v7.0, the values computed by RSMTool will be *different* from those computed by earlier versions.
```

:math:`A_{adj} = \sum_{i=1}^{N}\frac{w_i}{N} \times 100`

where :math:`w_i=1` if :math:`|M_i-H_i| \leq 1` and :math:`w_i=0` if  :math:`|M_i-H_i| \gt 1`.

The percent exact + adjacent agreement is computed using :ref:`rsmtool.utils.agreement<agreement_api>` with ``tolerance`` set to ``1``.

.. _kappa: 

Cohen's kappa (rounded scores only)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

:math:`\kappa=1-\frac{\sum_{k=0}^{K-1}{}\sum_{j=1}^{K}{w_{jk}X_{jk}}}{\sum_{k=0}^{K-1}{}\sum_{j=1}^{K}{w_{jk}m_{jk}}}`

when :math:`k=j` then :math:`w_{jk}` = 0 and
when :math:`k \neq j` then :math:`w_{jk}` = 1

where:

- :math:`K` is the number of scale score categories (maximum observed rating - minimum observed rating + 1). Note that for :math:`\kappa` computation the values of `H` and `M` are shifted to `H-minimum_rating` and `M-minimum_rating` so that the lowest value is 0. This is done to support negative labels.

- :math:`X_{jk}` is the number times where :math:`H=j` and :math:`M=k`. 

-  :math:`m_{jk}` is the percent chance agreement:

:math:`m_{jk} = \sum_{k=1}^{K}{\frac{n_{k+}}{N}\frac{n_{+k}}{N}}`

where 
* :math:`n_{k+}` - total number of responses where :math:`H_i=k` 

> * :math:`n_{+k}` - total number of responses where :math:`M_i=k` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        * :math:`n_{+k}` - total number of responses where :math:`M_i=k` 
```
